
NASA Logo - Web Link to NASA.gov		
+ Text Only Site
+ Non-Flash Version
+ Contact Glenn

FIND IT @ NASA
	Go
 ABOUT NASA	 NEWS AND EVENTS	 MULTIMEDIA	 MISSIONS	 MyNASA	 WORK FOR NASA
 Computer drawing of kids page link
This page is intended for college, high school, or middle school students. For younger students, a simpler explanation of the information on this page is available on the Kid's Page.
Mach number equals object speed divided by speed of sound. Pictures
 of aircraft at subsonic, supersonic and hypersonic Mach numbers
As an aircraft moves through the air, the air molecules near the aircraft are disturbed and move around the aircraft. If the aircraft passes at a low speed, typically less than 250 mph, the density of the air remains constant. But for higher speeds, some of the energy of the aircraft goes into compressing the air and locally changing the density of the air. This compressibility effect alters the amount of resulting force on the aircraft. The effect becomes more important as speed increases. Near and beyond the speed of sound, about 330 m/s or 760 mph, small disturbances in the flow are transmitted to other locations isentropically or with constant entropy. But a sharp disturbance generates a shock wave that affects both the lift and drag of an aircraft.

The ratio of the speed of the aircraft to the speed of sound in the gas determines the magnitude of many of the compressibility effects. Because of the importance of this speed ratio, aerodynamicists have designated it with a special parameter called the Mach number in honor of Ernst Mach, a late 19th century physicist who studied gas dynamics. The Mach number M allows us to define flight regimes in which compressibility effects vary.

Subsonic conditions occur for Mach numbers less than one, M < 1 . For the lowest subsonic conditions, compressibility can be ignored.
As the speed of the object approaches the speed of sound, the flight Mach number is nearly equal to one, M = 1, and the flow is said to be transonic. At some places on the object, the local speed exceeds the speed of sound. Compressibility effects are most important in transonic flows and lead to the early belief in a sound barrier. Flight faster than sound was thought to be impossible. In fact, the sound barrier was only an increase in the drag near sonic conditions because of compressibility effects. Because of the high drag associated with compressibility effects, aircraft do not cruise near Mach 1.
Supersonic conditions occur for Mach numbers greater than one, 1 < M < 3. Compressibility effects are important for supersonic aircraft, and shock waves are generated by the surface of the object. For high supersonic speeds, 3 < M < 5, aerodynamic heating also becomes very important for aircraft design.
For speeds greater than five times the speed of sound, M > 5, the flow is said to be hypersonic. At these speeds, some of the energy of the object now goes into exciting the chemical bonds which hold together the nitrogen and oxygen molecules of the air. At hypersonic speeds, the chemistry of the air must be considered when determining forces on the object. The Space Shuttle re-enters the atmosphere at high hypersonic speeds, M ~ 25. Under these conditions, the heated air becomes an ionized plasma of gas and the spacecraft must be insulated from the high temperatures.
For supersonic and hypersonic flows, small disturbances are transmitted downstream within a cone. The trigonometric sine of the cone angle b is equal to the inverse of the Mach number M and the angle is therefore called the Mach angle.
sin(b) = 1 / M

There is no upstream influence in a supersonic flow; disturbances are only transmitted downstream.

The Mach number appears as a similarity parameter in many of the equations for compressible flows, shock waves, and expansions. When wind tunnel testing, you must closely match the Mach number between the experiment and flight conditions. It is completely incorrect to measure a drag coefficient at some low speed (say 200 mph) and apply that drag coefficient at twice the speed of sound (approximately 1400 mph, Mach = 2.0). The compressibility of the air alters the important physics between these two cases.

The Mach number depends on the speed of sound in the gas and the speed of sound depends on the type of gas and the temperature of the gas. The speed of sound varies from planet to planet. On Earth, the atmosphere is composed of mostly diatomic nitrogen and oxygen, and the temperature depends on the altitude in a rather complex way. Scientists and engineers have created a mathematical model of the atmosphere to help them account for the changing effects of temperature with altitude. Mars also has an atmosphere composed of mostly carbon dioxide. There is a similar mathematical model of the Martian atmosphere. We have created an atmospheric calculator to let you study the variation of sound speed with planet and altitude.

Here's another JavaScript program to calculate speed of sound and Mach number for different planets, altitudes, and speed. You can use this calculator to determine the Mach number of a aircraft at a given speed and altitude on Earth or Mars.

Mach and Speed of Sound Calculator
Units:Planet:  Input
0
500
feetmphPress->OutputSpeedSpeed of SoundMach5007610.657mphmph






















To change input values, click on the input box (black on white), backspace over the input value, type in your new value, and hit the Enter key on the keyboard (this sends your new value to the program). You will see the output boxes (yellow on black) change value. You can use either English or Metric units and you can input either the Mach number or the speed by using the menu buttons. Just click on the menu button and click on your selection. If you are an experienced user of this calculator, you can use a sleek version of the program which loads faster on your computer and does not include these instructions. You can also download your own copy of the program to run off-line by clicking on this button:

Button to Download a Copy of the Program

Activities: 
Button to Display Grade 6-8 Activity  Button to Display Grade 9-12 Activity  Button to Display Grade 9-12 Activity  Button to Display Grade 9-12 Activity
Guided Tours
Button to Display Previous Page Speed of Sound:  Button to Display Next Page
Button to Display Previous Page Compressible Aerodynamics:  Button to Display Next Page
Button to Display Previous Page Mach and Speed of Sound Calculator:  Button to Display Next Page

Navigation ..

Button to Display Aerodynamics Index Button to Display Wind Tunnel Index Button to Display Propulsion Index Button to Display Hi Speed Aero Index 
Beginner's Guide Home Page
 

      First Gov Image	

+ Inspector General Hotline
+ Equal Employment Opportunity Data Posted Pursuant to the No Fear Act
+ Budgets, Strategic Plans and Accountability Reports
+ Freedom of Information Act
+ The President's Management Agenda
+ NASA Privacy Statement, Disclaimer,
and Accessibility Certification

 

NASA Logo   	
Editor: Nancy Hall
NASA Official: Nancy Hall
Last Updated: Mar 28 2018
+ Contact Glenn